Add contribution guidelines (#2385)
sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser: CONTRIBUTION.md

# Contribute to DB4S

Thanks for your interest in our project.  
This document is intended to serve as lighthouse for contributors, not an executor.

## Contents
- [How to ask about DB4S](#how-to-ask-about-db4s)
- [How to contribute?](#how-to-contribute)
    - [Report bug](#report-bug)
    - [Suggest enhancement](#suggest-enhancement)
    - [Translation](#translation)
- [Styleguide](#styleguide)
    - [CPP source code](#cpp-source-code)

>     - [Git commit messeage](#git-commit-message)

Reviewer: Typo of 'messeage' in the square brackets.

## How to ask about DB4S?

> You have questions about our project! If so, please check the following first.

Reviewer: If you have any questions about our project, please check the following first.

- Look up related topics on the [wiki](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/wiki)
- Search for existing similar issues

If your question is still not resolved, you can create an issue and ask a question.  

> And also a template from GitHub issue will help you write good bug report.

Reviewer: ~~And also~~   (Can be removed)

## How to contribute?
### Report bug
Please check the following before reporting a bug.

- Look up ['Known Issues'](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/issues/1688)
- Search for existing similar issues

> - Try in nightly build

Reviewer: Add link to https://nightlies.sqlitebrowser.org/latest

Remove 'in' and use 'a'

> If a bug has not yet been repoted or has not been resolved, please follow the below to help members identify the bug.

Reviewer: 'reported', not 'repoted'

- Use a good title to identify the bug
    - Ex) `Crash DB4S when try to reset the settings`
- Detailed steps to reproduce the bug
    - Ex) `File -> Preferences -> General -> Restore Defaults`
- What you actually expected to do and why
    - Ex) `DB4S settings are initalized normally.`
- System environment, DB4S version, Loaded extensions
    - Ex) `macOS Catalina Version 10.15.6(19G2021), DB4S Version 3.12.0, No Extensions`

> - Attach screenshots or screencasts related to the bug

Reviewer: Possibly add that images can be pasted directly into the GitHub issue, but screencasts (movie files) can be hosted on streamable.com, and the link pasted into the issue.

> - Crash log (if the app is forced to close)

Reviewer: I believe this is OS dependant - there is no crash log on Windows, for example.

>     - If you have a long crash log, [Pastebin](https://pastebin.com/) can help

Reviewer: If PasteBin is used, then there is a setting that it doesn't expire.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7872218/91530600-4b8e1d80-e903-11ea-86c3-0404472955d7.png)

> - Project file or database file what used (**NOT** required)

Reviewer: Replace 'what' to 'that is'

However, in some circumstances, the actual database file or schema is used.  However, not in the initial request, so leaving this here is fine.

And also a template from GitHub issue will help you write good bug report.

### Suggest enhancement

> Please check the following before suggest enhancement

Reviewer: replace 'suggest' with 'suggesting an'.
Add an '.' to 'enhancement'.

> - Search for existing simillar issues

Reviewer: Replace 'simillar' with 'similar'.

> And the please follow the below to help members identify the suggest.

Reviewer: Replace with "And please follow the below to help members identify the suggestion."

> - Use a good title to identify the suggest

Reviewer: Replace 'suggest' with 'suggestion'.

> - Describe the detail steps for the enhancement you want to propose

Reviewer: Replace "detail" with "detailed".

### Translation
Project translation can be done through the ['Qt Linguist'](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtlinguist-index.html) program.
Languages that are already being translated can be translated by modifying the corresponding translation file,
and translations for new languages can be translated by adding a new entry to the TRANSLATION section of the src/src.pro file and then rebuilding the project.

#### DO NOT translate key names in shortcuts
Keyboard shortcuts get automatically localized by Qt, and translating key names may indeed break them. They show up on the translation file only for the rare occasions that one has to redirect a shortcut to another one in a specific language. But even then, you should use the English key names to get this working. Theoretically, one could follow Qt conventions for translated key names, and they should work, but the risk to stumble upon Qt bugs or moving conventions is high, so it is better to not translate keys and only remap the shortcut. If you want to preserve the original key sequence (recommended), just leave the translation empty and finished.

## Styleguide

> Styleguides help keep project's source code look good and consistent.  

Reviewer: Replace "keep project's" with "keep the project's".
Replace "look" with "looking".

This can be of great help to existing member contributors and new contributors.

### CPP source code
#### Indent
- 4 spaces(**NOT** tabs!) for indentation

#### Declare variables
- Use lowerCamelCase
- Declare only one variable per line
- \* in pointer variable is attached to data type
    - Ex) `int* ptr`
- Avoid meaningless names (but you can use for counter or temporary)

#### Whitespace
- Do **NOT** use spaces after keywords
- Leave a space after each comma

#### Braces
- Place braces on the line after the keyword
- Brace can be omitted if the execution statement in the conditional/repeated statement consists of only one line

### Git commit message

> Keeping Git commit messages consistent can help keep track of code's history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keeping Git commit messages consistent can help keep track of code history.
```

# Contribute to DB4S

Thanks for your interest in our project.  
This document is intended to serve as lighthouse for contributors, not an executor.

## Contents
- [How to ask about DB4S](#how-to-ask-about-db4s)
- [How to contribute?](#how-to-contribute)
    - [Report bug](#report-bug)
    - [Suggest enhancement](#suggest-enhancement)
    - [Translation](#translation)
- [Styleguide](#styleguide)
    - [CPP source code](#cpp-source-code)
    - [Git commit message](#git-commit-message)

## How to ask about DB4S?
If you have any questions about our project, please check the following first.

- Look up related topics on the [wiki](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/wiki)
- Search for existing similar issues

If your question is still not resolved, you can create an issue and ask a question.  

> A template from the GitHub issue will help you write a good bug report.

Reviewer 2: We were talking about asking questions, so the reference to "good bug report" seems inconsistent. Maybe this should say a "good question".

Author: Nice catch, I just modified it.

- Look up ['Known Issues'](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/issues/1688)
- Search for existing similar issues
- Try a [nightly build](https://nightlies.sqlitebrowser.org/latest)

If a bug has not yet been reported or has not been resolved, please follow these steps to help members identify the bug.

- Use a concise but descriptive title to identify the bug/issue
    - Ex) `Crash DB4S when try to reset the settings`
- Detailed steps to reproduce the bug
    - Ex) `File -> Preferences -> General -> Restore Defaults`
- What you actually expected to do and why
    - Ex) `DB4S settings are initalized normally.`
- System environment, DB4S version, loaded extensions
    - Ex) `macOS Catalina Version 10.15.6(19G2021), DB4S Version 3.12.0, No Extensions`
- Attach screenshots or screencasts related to the bug/issue
    - You can add images can be pasted directly into the GitHub issue,  
    but screencast can be hosted on streamable.com and the link pasted into the issue.
- Crash log (If the crash log is known, although this is **NOT** required)
    - If you have a long crash log, [Pastebin](https://pastebin.com/) can help (Make sure to set expiration to 'never')

> - Project file or database file in use (**NOT** required)

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should add a reference to attach or paste the content of the Error Log in the SQL Log dock (and we maybe should rename that dock). Now it includes Qt errors as well as SQLite errors.

Author: I wrote it like below, What do you think?
>SQL log (If the SQL log is known, although this is **NOT** required)

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "If the SQL log is known"?

Author: I mean the case where there is an SQL log.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "If the log content is relevant"? There would be cases when that is not the case.

Author: That would be perfect, I modified it like below!
>SQL log (If the log content is relevant)

- Attach a simple example of the proposal, already applied projects or screenshots

### Translation
Project translation can be done through the ['Qt Linguist'](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtlinguist-index.html) program.
Languages that are already being translated can be translated by modifying the corresponding translation file,
and translations for new languages can be translated by adding a new entry to the TRANSLATION section of the src/src.pro file and then rebuilding the project.

#### DO NOT translate key names in shortcuts
Keyboard shortcuts get automatically localized by Qt, and translating key names may indeed break them. They show up on the translation file only for the rare occasions that one has to redirect a shortcut to another one in a specific language. But even then, you should use the English key names to get this working. Theoretically, one could follow Qt conventions for translated key names, and they should work, but the risk to stumble upon Qt bugs or moving conventions is high, so it is better to not translate keys and only remap the shortcut. If you want to preserve the original key sequence (recommended), just leave the translation empty and finished.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to link to https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/wiki/Translations instead of repeating the content. Maybe a quick summary can be used, but not all the detail.

Author: I left only the first sentence and attached a link to the wiki.

## Styleguide
Styleguides help keep the project's source code looking good and consistent.
This can be of great help to existing and new contributors.

### CPP source code
#### Indent
- 4 spaces(**NOT** tabs) for indentation

#### Declare variables

> - Use lowerCamelCase

Reviewer 2: Maybe a majority of the code follows that style, but there are also pieces using snake_case for objects and it seems to be the preferred style of our longest-time contributor lately. What do you reckon, @MKleusberg?

Reviewer 3: Good question. I think I tend to prefer CamelCase when working mostly with Qt classes and snake_case when working with the standard library. So I adapt the style of the library I'm using the most. Maybe we could make it a rule or maybe even more a suggestion to use lowerCamelCase for all the dialogs etc. and snake_case for the library and parser functions in the src/sql subdirectory.

Author: >Use lowerCamelCase for Qt class.
>Use snake_case for standard libarary.

@MKleusberg How about doing like this?

Reviewer 3: Sounds good to me :+1: Maybe add an example for each case to make it clearer what we mean:
> Use lowerCamelCase when working with Qt classes (for example in dialogs)
> Use snake_case when working with the standard library (for example in the sqlb namespace)

Author: That would be better, I updated by your opinion. Thanks! 😄

- Declare only one variable per line
- \* in pointer variable is attached to data type
    - Ex) `int* ptr`
- Avoid meaningless names (although these can be used for counter or temporary names)

#### Whitespace

> - Do **NOT** use spaces after keywords

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that we have to write `}else{`? I guess that is not the intention, but to avoid a space between a keyword and a parenthesis, like in `if(...)`. I have probably introduced some instances of the space option, because I like it more, but given that most of the code adds no space, I agree to make it always without it from now on.

Author: While writing this guidelines, I wrote it by referring to the existing code.
I think this part needs to be modified by collecting the opinions of other members or the longest-time contributors.

and, the code style I intended is as follows.

```cpp
if(condition)
{
    statement
} else {
    statement
}
```

Author: @MKleusberg May I get any advice on this matter too?

P.S. If it's ambiguous, we can delete this section.
Personally, this is because I don't think it significantly hurts the readability of the code.

Author: @MKleusberg Sorry to bother you. If you have time, can you please comment on this matter? 👀

Reviewer 4: This was foreseen. It highlights the need for 'astyle'(http://astyle.sourceforge.net/). This was one aspect of pull request #2238. I've ignored that, unfortunately, due to other projects but it can be revisited. This process, and application of formatting, can be automated.

Reviewer 3: @lucydodo  No worries. I'm happy to look into this :smile: 
Hmm, "Do not use spaces after keywords" seems a bit ambiguous indeed. Also "int a;" obviously has to have a space after the keyword. Maybe something like "Don't add an extra space before a left parenthesis"? This would catch all of these:
```c++
if(condition)
    do_something();

for(int i=0;i<5;i++)
    do_something();

void some_function() {}
```

Or can somebody find a counterexample? :smile:

Author: @MKleusberg That's right. To express it as a keyword here is too comprehensive.
It's a slightly different opinion, but after reading and thinking about the PR comments mentioned by @scottfurry above, on the one hand, I think that these rules may reduce work efficiency for members and contributors.

(Sorry to the members who gave us a lot of comments 😞) It may be one option,
delete contents about the code style and make only the rules that we think are simple and necessary. 
- No tab, Use 4 spaces
- Put the curly brackets on the same line as the keyword.

- Leave a space after each comma

#### Braces

> - Place braces on the line after the keyword

Reviewer 2: It is unclear if this includes the body of functions. Currently, most of them place the opening brace in the line following the prototype.

Author: I modified it as you said.
> Place braces on the same line as the keyword

Reviewer 2: I didn't exactly mean that. My impression is that the brace in the following line is more prevalent for functions, and in the same line, more prevalent for control statements, but it's true that currently there isn't any consensus.

- A brace can be omitted if the execution statement in the conditional/repeated statement consists of only one line

### Git commit message
Keeping Git commit messages consistent can help keep track of code history.

- Limit the subject line to 72 character or less
- Capitalize the subject line
- Use the present tense
- Use the imperative mood
- Use the body to explain why
- Reference related issue number

>     - Ex) `Add clearValue() method (#9999)`

Reviewer 2: We usually don't [close issues from the commit](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise/2.16/user/github/managing-your-work-on-github/closing-issues-using-keywords), like a lot of other projects do, because we like to ask the submitter to download the nightly and confirm it is closed. Should we add a reference here?

Author: I meant to include issue number in commit to facilitate tracking between commits and issues, not to close the issue.
but if you think this doesn't help we can delete it. (because it's just my think 👀 )

Reviewer 2: No, no, that's perfectly fine, but in addition, I propose to add a recomendation to not close the issue from the commit in order to request the user's confirmation. But that might too much detail, so it's open to discussion.

Author: I added the following recommendations for now.
>Do **NOT** close the issue from the commit(eg. Close #9999) before request the user's confirmation.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, it's important we ask users to verify things before closing an issue.  Too many projects don't, and that just leads to incomplete fixes and unhappy users.

    - [Translation](#translation)
- [Styleguide](#styleguide)
    - [CPP source code](#cpp-source-code)
    - [Git commit message](#git-commit-message)

## How to ask about DB4S?
If you have any questions about our project, please check the following first.

- Look up related topics on the [wiki](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/wiki)
- Search for existing similar issues

If your question is still not resolved, you can create an issue and ask a question.  
A template from the GitHub issue will help you write a good bug report.

## How to contribute?

> ### Report bug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Report bug/issue
```

> Please check the following before reporting a bug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please check the following before reporting a bug or issue.
```

- Look up ['Known Issues'](https://github.com/sqlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser/issues/1688)
- Search for existing similar issues
- Try a [nightly build](https://nightlies.sqlitebrowser.org/latest)

If a bug has not yet been reported or has not been resolved, please follow these steps to help members identify the bug.

> - Use a good title to identify the bug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use a concise but descriptive title to identify the bug/issue
```

- System environment, DB4S version, Loaded extensions
    - Ex) `macOS Catalina Version 10.15.6(19G2021), DB4S Version 3.12.0, No Extensions`

> - Attach screenshots or screencasts related to the bug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Attach screenshots or screencasts related to the bug/issue
```

    - You can add images can be pasted directly into the GitHub issue,  
    but screencast can be hosted on streamable.com and the link pasted into the issue.

> - Crash log (If the crash log is known, **NOT** required)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Crash log (if the crash log is known, although this is **NOT** required)
```

    - If you have a long crash log, [Pastebin](https://pastebin.com/) can help (Make sure to set expiration to 'never')
- Project file or database file in use (**NOT** required)

> And also a template from GitHub issue will help you write good bug report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A template from the GitHub issue will help you write a good bug/issue report.
```

### Suggest enhancement
Please check the following before suggesting an enhancement.

- Search for existing similar issues

And please follow the below to help members identify the suggestion.

> - Use a good title to identify the suggestion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use a concise but descriptive title to identify the suggestion
```

## Styleguide
Styleguides help keep the project's source code looking good and consistent.
This can be of great help to existing and new contributors.

### CPP source code
#### Indent
- 4 spaces(**NOT** tabs) for indentation

#### Declare variables
- Use lowerCamelCase
- Declare only one variable per line
- \* in pointer variable is attached to data type
    - Ex) `int* ptr`
- Avoid meaningless names (although these can be used for counter or temporary names)

#### Whitespace
- Do **NOT** use spaces after keywords
- Leave a space after each comma

#### Braces
- Place braces on the line after the keyword

> - A Brace can be omitted if the execution statement in the conditional/repeated statement consists of only one line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A brace can be omitted if the execution statement in the conditional/repeated statement consists of only one line
```
